28th June 2026

WSL/Linux setup

Every operating system (OS) provides one or more shells for users to interact with it.
Imagine shell is like a receptionist at a company's front desk.
Instead of speaking directly to the operating system, users give commands to the shell. 
So shell interprets these commands, asks the operating system (through the kernel) to perform or deliver the requested task, and then returns the results to the user.

Operating System         Common Shells
---------------------------------------------------------
1. Windows               command prompt (cmd), PowerShell
2. Linux                 bash, fish, dash

Previous years, when users wanted to use Linux on Windows laptop, they have to choose whether to perform:
(i) dual boot; basically choosing which OS to be used,
(ii) virtual machine; a software that enables Linux to run inside it but used a lot of RAM and CPU, or 
(iii) buy a separate Linux computer.
Then, in 2016, Microsoft announced Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL), allowing users to run Linux inside Windows without installing a separate OS. 
The first version, WSL1, translated Linux system calls instead of running a real Linux kernel, so some softwares was not fully compatible. 
In 2019, Microsoft introduced WSL2 which runs a real Linux kernel inside a lightweight environment, providing improved performance. 
Thanks to the developer that users like me (with no computational background) can run Linux inside my Windows without me needing to upgrade or change my laptop.

A) Installation (One-time setup)
   To install WSL inside Windows, follow these commands:

1) Open Windows Powershell.

2) Run

   wsl --install

   At this stage, we are basically asking the Powershell (the shell) to execute the command "wsl --install". Powershell passes the request to Windows, which installs WSL.

3) Restart the computer.

4) Open Powershell again and run

   wsl --status

   This command checks whether WSL is installed and which version is used.
   The output should show WSL2 is installed as the default version.

5) Check the information about the Linux distribution (distro) by running

   wsl --list --online

   At this stage, you will see all Linux distributions.

6) Run

   wsl --install -d Ubuntu-22.04
  
   We are asking PowerShell (the Windows shell) to execute the command and passes the request to Windows, whcih downloads and installs Ubuntu (one of the Linux distro)
   After the installation is complete, Ubuntu will start for the first time. 
   Ubuntu will then ask us to create username and password.
   Once the account is created successfully, we will enter the Ubuntu bash shell and see a prompt similar to:

   nadia-bioeng@Nadia:~$ where,
   -----------------------------
   nadia-bioeng = Linux username
   Nadia	= computer hostname
   ~		= Linux home directory 
   $		= normal user prompt

7) Run

   wsl --status

   You will see the output as
   ---------------------------------- 
   Default Distribution: Ubuntu-22.04
   Default Version: 2
   
8) Check the installed distro and its version by running

   wsl --list --verbose

   At this stage, the output will be:
   NAME           STATE           VERSION
   --------------------------------------
   Ubuntu-22.04   Stopped         2
   
   This command verifies that Ubuntu has been installed and that WSL2 is the default version.

9) Then, proceed to step B(2).

B) Windows to Ubuntu (Daily usage)
   To enter Ubuntu from Windows (this is when you exit shell and want to enter the Ubuntu environment again from Windows Powershell) :

1) Run
  
   wsl -d Ubuntu-22.04
  
   This command starts the Ubuntu distribution inside WSL and opens a bash shell, allowing us to execute Linux commands.

2) Run 

   cd ~

   This command changes the current directory to my home Linux directory (~).

From this onwards, I began learning how to navigate the Linux filesystem using basic bash commands.
   
   Bash commands:
   pwd		 = print the current working directory
   ls		 = list files and folders
   ls -la	 = list all files in long format (including hidden files)
   whoami	 = display current Linux username (who am I = nadia-bioeng)
   uname -a	 = display Linux kernel and system information
   df -h	 = display available disc space in a human-readable format
   cd		 = change directory
   .		 = represents current location
   cd ..	 = represents parent directory
   mkdir	 = make directory
   rmdir	 = remove an empty directory (permanently)
   rm -r	 = remove directory with its contents

So, these are the things I learned in this first ever module. 
